Hey, Vsauce, Michael here. If every single one of us held hands together in a chain of unity around Earth, would there be enough of us to go all the way around the planet? There are about 7 .5 billion of us, and that's a lot, but remember that that many human bodies thrown together into one big pile would barely fill the Grand Canyon. This is all of us in one place. The physical bulk of all living human flesh on Earth today would only make a cone about 7 ,000 people tall and 2 ,000 across. That's it. But that's a three -dimensional shape. What if we made a one -dimensional, single -file line of people each with, say, one meter of a row, and we stretched that around the planet? it. Well, we would make it all the way around and still have 99 .5 % of the human population left. If we made a circle that included everyone, the ring of people would be more than 2 .4 million kilometers in diameter, dorking the orbit of our own moon. Now that's not just a circle. That is a sir cool. Let's talk about circles today. Specifically something that they do roll. But what is rolling? Well, rolling occurs whenever something moves with respect to something else and is always in contact with that something else and the contact points have instantaneous velocities of zero. That is, there's no slide. In mathematics, the path traced by a point on a rolling object is called a roulette. French for little wheel. The center of a disc produces a roulette that's just a smooth straight line, while rolling on one, and this is why discs are good wheels. A square, on the other hand, would be bumpy. But square centers can make straight, smooth roulette across the right surfaces. This is the principle behind square wheels, which I recently had the pleasure of enjoying at the Museum of Mathematics in New York City. Stan Wagon wrote a fantastic and famous article about wheels, which I've linked down in the description below. It's a great read. He also contributed a fantastic interactive tool to the Wolfram demonstration project that allows you to build a wheel and then find the corresponding road shape that allows it to roll smoothly. The roulette traced by a point on a disc as it rolls on a straight line has a special name. It's called a trocoid from the Greek word for wheel, trocos. Now trocoids can be curtailed. or pro late depending on whether the tracing point is inside or outside the circumference. If the point is on the circumference the resulting curve is called a cycloid. Cycloids are very special and they are the star of this episode. Now I've been working with Adam Savage a lot lately as we gear up for Brain Candy Live, our 40 city tour that I hope to see you at. Recently I asked Adam for some help with relapse. Adam give a favorite polygon. The whole group I just literally an actual big. You can't, they're like your children. You can't take a favorite. I don't have a favorite either. I do have a favorite thing that you can do with a polygon. Okay. Make a cyclic on. A cyclic on is an actual thing. It's not an actual thing. It's an actual thing. Do I have a polygon around here? Here, this, this here's a square, right? Right. Say this is a square. Yeah. If I take one of the vertexes of this square, and I start rolling this square, and you follow where that vertex, oh shoot. Let me roll this better. Are you ready? Yeah. All right. The actual path. It describes a curve. Described here. Yeah, that curve is called a cyclagon. Oh. And as you pick polygons with more and more sides, you get closer and closer to what I want from you today. OK. A cycloid. A cycloid. Now, I could have just done this in Photoshop and done like an animation like I normally do. But you have a shop. We can actually build this. And you can build things. OK. Why did I want to build a cycloid? Well, let me ask you this. With only gravity to move you, what's the fastest way to roll or slide from a point to some other point below, but not directly below? Would it be a straight line? Well, that would certainly be the shortest path. But when you fall, gravity accelerates you, and falling vertically a lot right away would mean having a higher top speed during more of the journey. And that can make up for the fact that a path like this is much longer than a straight line. But of these two considerations, accelerate quickly and don't have too long of a path, what's the optimal combination? Finding the answer, the path of least time, is called the Brachista Crone Problem. And it's been around for a while. Galileo thought the answer was a path that's just a piece of a circle. But he was wrong, there's a better one. And in 1697, Johann Bernoulli came up with the answer using a very clever approach. To see how he solved it, let's start with a similar problem. You are standing in some mud and you want to run to a ball in the street as quickly as possible. Now, a straight line would be the path of shortest distance. But if you can run on... pavement much faster than you can run in mud. The path of shortest time would be one in which you spend less time moving slowly in mud and more time on the surface you're fast on. The angle you should enter the pavement at depends on how fast you move on both surfaces. As it turns out, when the ratio between the signs of these two angles equals the ratio between your speeds across both surfaces, the resulting path will be the optimal quickest route. This is called Snell's Law. Light always obeys Snell's Law. When it changes speeds, like when it leaves a material in which it moves more slowly, like water and enters one in which it moves more quickly, like air, it always refracts according to Snell's Law. In other words, light always follows the route that is the fastest for it to take. this fact to tackle the brachista -crown problem. Light changing speed is analogous to a falling object changing speed. But of course a falling object doesn't just speed up once, its speed is always increasing, it's accelerating. To mimic this, using light, which Bernoulli knew would always show him the fastest possible route, all he had to do was add more and thinner and thinner layers in which the speed of light was faster and faster and faster. And well, what do you know? There it is. The brachista -crown curve. The path of least time. Roll down a track like this and you will beat anything rolling down any other path every time. Bernoulli was clever enough to realize that this curve can be described in another way, as a roulette. Specifically, he noticed that it was a cycloid. The path traced by a point on a circle rolling along a line. A cycloid satisfies, snows, law, everywhere. To see why, I highly recommend watching this video on the Brachista Crone problem. This channel is fantastic, by the way, on the huge fan the visuals and explanations are top notch. Anyway, a cycloid provides the perfect balance between keeping the journey distance short and picking up speed early. Now I told Adam all of this and I told him that it would be really fun to have a cycloid curve we could roll things down. And he said, clearly we should start building. We should just start building it. And what we need is a circle. Okay. That's of the height that we want. And then we're going to use that circle to trace a cycloid curve. I want to do a race. Right? So if we're going to do, like if you have point A here and point B here and you say that there's some kind of curve that's better than a straight line in terms of something traveling between those two, then I want to also make a straight line from A to B. Yeah. And maybe also a really extreme curve like that. Right, okay. Got some protractors there. Ooh. I have it. You have a compass extension. I do. I have all sorts of things. I've never seen such things. Is that it? Yeah. That connects to that. And that connects to that. That's gonna be... Okay. Give her a take. I almost am... I feel guilty that this is like a dream of mine coming true. Oh really? But it's such a nerdy dream too. It's not like I want this, you know, red rider bee begun. It's like I just want to curve that things roll down. Okay, so then clearly when we're done with this, this is my Christmas present to you. I can't see. I think I'm currently like working out a way to do this in my head that actually makes it fairly compact and not super complicated. Yeah. Take a blade and cut out like an inch around this whole thing. And how are you going to do the finishing? I'm going to cut this unless you would like to on the bands. You can start. Okay. Here we go. Okay. Now, that's a little bit rough, so we're going to finish it on my disc center. Oh wow. That's close enough. That's pretty good. So now you want to use this to draw a cycloid. So you'll need a little hole. Yeah, so that the point of our drawing implement is on the rim, not above it. I'm doing this right inside. I messed that up. I don't think so. That's even better than having the rim hole because we want the line to be right on the edge. OK, so what we're going to do is we're going to create a pattern for the cycloid curve that I'm then going to transfer to a acrylic, to clear acrylic. That'll allow us to see things really clearly. Yeah. So let this in here. And this allows you to roll your cycloid right? Because we're just doing it is literally like that. Right? Oh yeah, see this is perfect. Yeah, pushed against here. I shouldn't slip. This is like a Ouija board for geometry nerds. It is a Ouija board for geometry nerds. Okay, there we go. That's about... Brachista Crone! That's the curve that we're talking about. Yeah. That's the beginning. That's the end. And this is our pattern. Yeah. That's cool. That's cool. Okay, show. I'm going to end up with a a piece of plywood. Let's say three quarters of an inch thick, but it's going to have channels table sawed out of it that travel its length. And in those channels we'll sit my clear acrylic curves. And it'll also have an upright that also will have the channels milled out of it on the table saw. And that will allow the curve to sit and be supported. Yeah, a little backstop here, easily. At the bottom, that'll allow us to hear that they all hit at the same time. There's a couple things going on. One is that we've got a cycloid, straight line, and then we've got extreme curve. Right. And are these, you had mentioned bending the acrylic so we could adjust the angle. No, actually, I have, and this is, you'll like this. Okay. The acrylic will just be a thin of acrylic. Just a thin sheet of it. Traveling on that will be, and I have material for this, some delrin or acetyl rollers that look like this. So from the side, they'll look like this. They'll look like an H, in which the acrylic sits in there. And the roller is self -supporting. on the acrylic, but rolls down it. Oh, that is tolerance. I love it. I like those curves. While Adam and I build a real life cycloid track, let's take some time to appreciate other kinds of roulette. As mentioned before, trocoids are curves made by discs rolling on straight lines, but an epitrocoid is made when a disc rolls around the outside of a circle. Roll a disc inside a circle and what you've made is a hypo trocoid. These are the mathematical names for the curves you make when using a spyrograph toy. Notice that the holes don't lie on the circumference of the discs. Though some do come close, there's a special name for epitrocoids and hypo trocoids traced by... points on circumferences analogous to discs rolling on straight lines, they are epicycloids and hypocycloids. Now if two circles have the same radius, a point on the rolling one will touch the stationary one exactly once, always in the same spot, creating a cusp. This cute heart -shaped epicycloid is also known as a cardioid. If the rolling circle has half the larger radius, you'll get a two cusp epicycloid, the shape of which is called a nephroid, because it apparently looks like a kidney, I guess. One -third the radius gives you three cusps, one -fourth four cusps, and so on. As for hypocycloids, if the inner circles radius is one quarter of the larger, the resulting roulette curve is called an asteroid, because it looks like a star, which the ancients also thought about asteroids. One -third the radius and you've got a - deltoid, named after its resemblance to the Greek letter delta. One half the radius, and well, you get a straight line. This fun relationship is called a toocy couple. Rotational motion turned into linear motion. Follow a number of points on the rolling circle and you'll get the famous illusion where every individual point moves in a straight line, but the whole thing describes a rolling circle. Put a handle on it and you've built a tramble of arcametes, aka an ellipsograph, when used to make ellipses, aka a hillbilly entertainment center when bought in Oceola, Missouri. Anyway, let's get back to Adam and I's curved comparison build. I have a finish line. Oh, beautiful. Okay, there's your finish line. Are you ready? I'm ready. All right, I'll count us down 321 go. Here we go. 3, 2, 1. One go One two three with the state was second straight was last straight was last the shortest distance between two points was last Slowest way to get there. Yeah, it certainly was let's try it one more time. Yep because it was super close the Brachista Crone curve was by far the winner. Yeah, what a mouthful of a name by the way Brachista Crone but he's Brachista Crone not related to the Brachios or I looked at our different Roots and so I once looked up the different string in genius and Ingenuity and they don't have the string and they're not related. No All right, all right. I'm ready kind of it three two one go Yeah, same results same result One two but these are so close. It's hard to tell you Well, we're answering the main question, which is that the Berkista Crome Curve is the fastest way to get there. Well, a Berkista Crone Curve is also known as a Tata Crone Curve that has another property that we should test. What's this? And that is... Wait, hold on. Hold on. Before you get to this, we've established... Between these three curves, that the cycloid made Berkista Crone Curve is by far the fastest. It's by far the fastest. Okay, great. You get steep and unfortunately, you pick up a lot of speed right away, but then you've got a lot of this with little acceleration. You go straight down and, you know, funny enough, what you want is that perfect balance of gravity's acceleration but also moving to where you need to be. And that's fast. That's fast enough to me that a geometry. Which is the cycloid curve would yield such an efficient Exploitation of the forces involved. Yeah, exactly because if if there was no acceleration if if there was just one force in the beginning Straight line would probably be the fastest right. Okay. What is the other? quality of the Tata Chrome curve? You just said it Tata Chrome means same time so As the geometry and math tells us No matter where you start an object. Yeah, whoops the clamp just fell off It's your fault pretty it wasn't my fault, but also come on clamp No, no, it's actually you know how to do these tables are on pain in the ass because they have these lips on them and they Actually, oh, that's like a yeah, they drive me nuts. It's it's actually my fault Good I'm glad we got that result So okay, so I'm gonna remove the straight line guys well, so we're left with a cycle which is called a brachista -crone curve, but it also has a bizarre property where, no matter where I start an object on it. When I let go, they always reach the bottom. In the same amount of time. Wait a second. So if I start it here, the amount of time it takes for this to get to the end is the same amount of time it takes for it to get to the end from here. Yeah, and the same from right here. Well, there. Wow, okay. So starting from here, it's going to be tough because of friction. Yeah, now if you do this in software, it's perfect. But that's boring. This is the real world and maybe we won't start the net. Well, I mean, if we do one, two, and three, we actually have some kind of work to do. I feel like we could probably get one to work from here. Like that, there might be a lot of friction involved. But look at all. see we can always see we've got enough of them that's why we made three curves so we can test this property and these were all cut and sanded cland together so they are incredibly similar I will have to champ for the edge as I did on this one yeah that's right and what's the music still wool the little notes back that once you've torn paper off of plexiglass it crumbles into a really nice fog to be thrown long distances hey I think I get this paper on the plexiglass in the first place it's a good question I've never seen it happen because it doesn't really feel glued well they've got some kind of glue 3M glue right yeah I think this is gonna be really cool I hope it's cool because in theory and practice theory in theory theory and practice is the same thing but in practice I want to the universe Steve Chicago where one of their things is, well that sounds good in practice. How is it in theory? It's the life of the mind there. So let us see if you do, if I do one up here and you do one there and, okay, yeah. So this has got to be without this. I think the same person should release them because then time it better. So here, put that one here. Okay. All right, so three different positions. This one has longer to go. Yep, this one has the shortest path. So who's gonna reach the bottom first? Okay, here we go. Let's see, if you wish it would say, the one in my, this one, we go first, ready? Yeah. Good. Pretty good. That was awesome. That was so easy. They all like, rip, they lined right up. All right, let's do, let's switch it up. Okay. I think you're gonna have to be the one to release them. It's otherwise it won't be easy to time. Here we go. Three, two, one. I've got them lining up. Yeah, they line up like they're waiting for each other. I'm going to stand further away because I want to see the full path. Okay, ready? Yeah. Three, two, one. How cool is that? They totally line up to hit about the same period as they would for here. So given the vagaries of some extra frictions here and there, they're actually hitting this at the same sort of periodicity that they are when they start at the same point. So there's that and then... Is this the Tata Chrome Curve demonstration rig of your dreams? It really is. It's also the Brachista Cron, Rig of My Dreams and... the cycloid rig of my dreams. So check that out. Keep doing that, yeah. That is really cool. Another one? Yeah, that was exactly on point. Wow. Racia, see in this game, no matter where you start, no matter who you are, you're always a winner. Everybody's a winner. There's always a tie. So this is brain candy for me, Adam. Totally. This is something that was previously abstract and only seen in animations and text made real. Now I can put these wherever I want. I'm not stuck with what someone else did. I can physically hold it. And that's what makes brain candy exciting for me. It is. I love taking the theoretical and making it physical. And actually, honestly, we've always had what seemed to me like sister enterprises. Yeah. And it's nice to join them together. Yeah. This is a little child of ours, isn't it? Maybe one of us wasn't. It's so good at sanding and maybe the other of us kind of saved the day. But it's real now and it's alive and I think it's loving its life. That was fun. It was really fun. Thank you. It was my dream come true. Adam, thank you so much for your help. Working with you is always amazing. I hope to see all of you out there watching at Brain Candy Live. It's going to be incredible. And in your daily lives, may you always find the Tata Chrome. The solution that brings you and others together, even if you started in different places. And as always, thanks for watching.